
## Database & DBMS
- Database (DB): orgnaized collection of data managed by DBMS.
- Database Mangement System (DBMS) : a software between user and data that offers user to do several operations on data (e.g. MySql, Microsoft Sql Server, MongoDb).
> A database schema defines the structure of the database: tables, columns, data types, constraints, and the relationships between them. Every record must follow this predefined structure.
---
## Relational Databases
In simple terms, it’s a database model that *represents data using tables*. The term "relational" means that these tables are connected to each other (have relations).

for example, here is a ```Client``` and ```Shirt``` entities represented in two tables, you can see clearly the "relation" between ```Client``` and his ```Shirt```

|  ID |  Name  | Address | Age | ShirtId |
| :-: | :----: | :-----: | :-: | :------: |
|  1  | Kareem |   Giza  |  20 |     3    |
|  2  |  Magdy |  Cairo  |  40 |     1    |
|  3  | Dawood |   Alex  |  80 |     2    |

*Table represeting ```Client```*

|  ID | Size | Price |
| :-: | :--: | ----: |
|  1  |   L  | \$160 |
|  2  |  XL  | \$120 |
|  3  |   M  | \$140 |

*Table represeting ```Shirt```*

> Examples of Relational Database Mangement System (RDBMS) : **MySQL, PostgreSql, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle Database.**
---
### Key concepts 
- **Primary Key** : a key uniquely identify each row in a table, and it cannot be null (*See ```ID``` in the previous tables*).

- **Foreign Key** : a key uniquely identifies a row of another table (*See ```ShirtId``` and ```ID``` in **Shirt** Table*)

- **Surrogate Key** : A Primary Key that is auto-generated by the system with no business meaning (e.g., an auto-incrementing ID), whereas a Primary Key can have real-world meaning, like a National ID.

- **Composite Key**: A group of two or more columns that uniquely identifies each row of a table.

  For example, in this table, you cannot know the `Quantity` a customer buys of a product without knowing both the `CustomerID` and the `ProductID`.

  | **CustomerID** | **ProductID** | **Quantity** |
  |:--------------:|:-------------:|:------------:|
  |       1       |       5       |      90      |
  |       2       |       4       |      20      |
  |       3       |       9       |      40      |

  Here, the **Composite Key** is the combination of `CustomerID` and `ProductID`, as together they uniquely identify each record.


- **Candidate Key** : is key of a table that can be selected as a Primary key.
- **Alternate Key** : a Candidate Key that is currently not selected as a Primary Key.

### Transactions & ACID Properites 
**Transaction** refers to a sequence of one or more operations (such as read, write, update, or delete).
**Data Integrity in DBMS**  refers to the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of data throughout its lifecycle.

ACID properites --if applied-- ensure data integrity on transactions made on DB
- Atomicity : operations succeed, or none are applied and if any part fails, the entire transaction is rolled back.
- Consistency : database must remain in a valid state before and after a transaction.
- Isolation : ensure that transactions run independently without affecting each other.
- Durability : changes saved even if system fails.

> if isolation did not applied, concurrent tranctions may lead to this problems
>- Dirty reads: reading uncommitted data
>- Non-repeatable reads: data changes between two reads
>- Phantom reads: new rows appear during a transaction

---
## Non-Relational Databases
Databaes that doesn't represent data in tabluar form , instead data may be stored at many forms such as JSON docs or a graph of edges and vertices (flexiable schema).

fo example, here is a table that stores data as JSON document.
| Key  | Document |
|------|----------|
| 1001 | ```{ "CustomerID": 99, "OrderItems": [ { "ProductID": 2010, "Quantity": 2, "Cost": 520 }, { "ProductID": 4365, "Quantity": 1, "Cost": 18 } ], "OrderDate": "04/01/2017" }``` |
| 1002 | ```{ "CustomerID": 220, "OrderItems": [ { "ProductID": 1285, "Quantity": 1, "Cost": 120 } ], "OrderDate": "05/08/2017" }``` |

> Side note :  NoSQL refers to data stores that do not use SQL for queries. Instead, the data stores use other programming languages and constructs to query the data



